Nimble table spec (#828)
ni/nimble: packages/nimble-components/src/table/specs/README.md

-   We do not intend for the `nimble-table` to handle data sets of 50K or more on the client-side. Visualizing such sizes of data sets are meant to be enabled through various "data virtualiazation" means, such as the server only sending over subsets of the data at a time, appropriately filtered down to a reasonable size.

-   Non-virtualized static tables.

### Features

In addition to simply rendering data, the `nimble-table` will provide APIs/interactions that will allow a user to do the following:

-   Interactively and programmatically size columns
-   Interactively and programmatically sort columns
-   Pin columns: columns remain fixed during horizontal scrolling
-   Provide column ordering (programmatically only at first possibly)
-   Group rows: display rows in a collapsible section when they share the same value for the grouped column
-   Multi-select rows (interactively only at first possibly)
-   Provide hierarchy via the data
-   Provide custom column rendering
-   Provide API for adding action menu

#### _Out of Scope of Initial Release_

The following are features that we intend to prioritize eventually after the initial release:

> -   Hierarchy and Grouping together (though this could happen in the initial release if simply enough to accomplish)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Hierarchy and Grouping together (though this could happen in the initial release if simple enough to accomplish)
```

-   Custom expanded row content

>     -   An example would be showing a sub-tree when you expand a row

Reviewer: I'm not quite sure what you mean here. Should this say "sub-table" rather than a "sub-tree"?

Author: Updated.

-   Editable cells
-   APIs around pagination/infinite scrolling
-   High-level configuration APIs
    -   Allow for easy getting/setting of total configurable state, which is useful for maintaining state of the table as a user navigates to other pages in an app.
-   Filter on any text match across all cells

> -   Selection configuration: Ability to specify single vs. multi-select

Reviewer: While this is listed as out of scope, it might be good to list no-selection as one of the options we would likely have.

Author: Done.

    -   Define the anatomy of row selection in the table DOM
        -   Indeterminate checkbox at the far left of each row?
        -   Selected row CSS/design
    -   Define events raised when row selection changes/occurs
    -   Define table-level row-selection API
-   Grouping
    -   Define interactive mechanism, if any, to provide grouping
    -   Define table-level API for setting grouping
    -   Define events raised when grouping changes
    -   Describe how data hierarchy should work with grouping
-   Sorting
    -   Define the table-level API for setting sorting
    -   Define events raised when sorting changes
    -   Describe how sorting should with with hierarchical data
-   Action Menu
    -   Define how the action menu gets associated with a particular column
    -   Define the table-level(column-level?) API(s) for applying an action menu to the table (slot, properties, etc...)

_Properties_

Placeholder

_Events_

Placeholder

### Anatomy

_Slots_

-   `slottedColumns` (Placeholder for column slots)
-   `actionMenu` (Placeholder for action menu)

### Angular integration

Angular support should be accomplished through the typical directive patterns.

> _Placeholder for other Angular considerations:_

Reviewer: Do you expect additional Angular & Blazor considerations to be added here? If not, we should remove the placeholders. We can always add more content even if they aren't there, but I think it would be better to avoid so many placeholders if we aren't specifically calling the sections out as incomplete.

Author: I've removed them and added notes about what we should expect to do for the data API in Blazor.

There could be room for there to be Angular-centric implementations such as using Angular components for things like the Action Menu, or possibly a custom column. This section should be updated as needed.

### Blazor integration

> Blazor support should be accomplished through the typical integration patterns. It should be noted that if the Nimble `Table` component is generic, then the Blazor component will mirror that generic

Reviewer: If we think that the comment about Blazor mirroring the generic API of the Table is important, you should also call that out for the Angular directive.

Author: I've removed that comment as I think that's just a natural conclusion for both frameworks.

#### Testing

As the performance for a table is of critical importance, we should formulate a deliberate approach to verifying the performance meets our expectations. For now, I recommend a series of manual tests, but ultimately it would be good to automate this process which I think we should cover in a separate HLD.

### Dependencies

-   [TanStack Table](https://github.com/tanstack/table)
-   [TanStack Virtual](https://github.com/TanStack/virtual)

These dependencies are MIT licensed, and have no dependencies of their own, so security concerns should be at a minimum. When building a TS app that does not include the `nimble-table` the TanStack libraries are not included in the build output.

### Test Plan

Intend to test completely with unit tests and Chromatic visual tests.

We also should attempt to create unit tests to cover the TanStack capabilities we will be leveraging, ideally by submitting them to the TanStack repo. Note that TanStack has already implemented much of the needed tests, except that they are targeting a React environment. The work should largely be a porting effort.

### Documentation

> Storybooks will be added to document/showcase the various features and APIs.

Reviewer: I think calling them 'stories' is more accurate.

```suggestion
Storybook stories will be added to document/showcase the various features and APIs.
```

-   Non-virtualized static tables.

### Features

In addition to simply rendering data, the `nimble-table` will provide APIs/interactions that will allow a user to do the following:

-   Interactively and programmatically size columns
-   Interactively and programmatically sort columns
-   Pin columns: columns remain fixed during horizontal scrolling
-   Provide column ordering (programmatically only at first possibly)
-   Group rows: display rows in a collapsible section when they share the same value for the grouped column
-   Multi-select rows (interactively only at first possibly)
-   Provide hierarchy via the data
-   Provide custom column rendering
-   Provide API for adding action menu

#### _Out of Scope of Initial Release_

The following are features that we intend to prioritize eventually after the initial release:

-   Hierarchy and Grouping together (though this could happen in the initial release if simply enough to accomplish)
-   Custom expanded row content
    -   An example would be showing a sub-tree when you expand a row

> -   Editable cells

Reviewer 2: Is this specific to editing like Excel where the user can directly type into a cell?

Does this bullet also include the use case of displaying a drop down (nimble-select) in a cell, the user using that control to change a value (from Volts to Millivolts, as an example) and that value being updated in the data?

Is that use case achieved by something outside of this bullet? I think probably, but I just wanted to make sure of your intent with this one.

Author: Editable cells covers all cases where a user can modify the data being displayed. So I believe this covers the full breadth of scenarios you outlined.

### Blazor integration

Blazor support should be accomplished through the typical integration patterns. It should be noted that if the Nimble `Table` component is generic, then the Blazor component will mirror that generic
API.

_Placeholder for other Blazor considerations:_

---

## Implementation

The `nimble-table` will require various sub-components to exist in order to properly/efficiently render the data. The web components and their respective responsibilities are as follows:

`<nimble-table>`

-   Creates the row elements that will be used to render each row of data
-   Provides any necessary elements for proper virtualization
-   Manages keyboard navigation between rows
-   Supports slotting of column elements
-   Supports slotting of menu

`<nimble-table-row>`

-   Creates the cell elements that will be used to render each value in the data
-   Manages keyboarding within the row

`<nimble-table-cell>`

-   Renders the data via a custom template
-   Manages the keyboard interactions to pass focus in/out of custom cells

> 

Author: This is covered by the 'Headers' Feature API bullet point of "Require specific component type...". Note that this is an implementation detail. The FAST DataGrid, for example, has no technical difference between a header cell component, and a row cell component.

[Table visual design](https://xd.adobe.com/view/33ffad4a-eb2c-4241-b8c5-ebfff1faf6f6-66ac/screen/b9cee5e2-49a4-425a-9ed4-38b23ba2e313/)

### Non-goals

-   The `nimble-table` will not offer spreadsheet-like features such as infinite columns, or summary functions.

-   We do not intend for the `nimble-table` to handle data sets of 50K or more on the client-side. Visualizing such sizes of data sets are meant to be enabled through various "data virtualiazation" means, such as the server only sending over subsets of the data at a time, appropriately filtered down to a reasonable size.

-   Non-virtualized static tables.

### Features

In addition to simply rendering data, the `nimble-table` will provide APIs/interactions that will allow a user to do the following:

-   Interactively and programmatically size columns
-   Interactively and programmatically sort columns
-   Pin columns: columns remain fixed during horizontal scrolling
-   Provide column ordering (programmatically only at first possibly)
-   Group rows: display rows in a collapsible section when they share the same value for the grouped column

> -   Multi-select rows (interactively only at first possibly)

Author: Well, one requires an API design, and the other doesn't. The only reason to mention the possibility of it being interactive-only, is that I don't believe SLE requires a programmatic interface.

        -   Selected row CSS/design
    -   Define events raised when row selection changes/occurs
    -   Define table-level row-selection API
-   Grouping
    -   Define interactive mechanism, if any, to provide grouping
    -   Define table-level API for setting grouping
    -   Define events raised when grouping changes
    -   Describe how data hierarchy should work with grouping
-   Sorting
    -   Define the table-level API for setting sorting
    -   Define events raised when sorting changes
    -   Describe how sorting should with with hierarchical and/or grouped data
-   Hierarchy
    -   Define how hierarchy will be represented in the data
        -   Attribute on table to represent parentId?
    -   Define event/property APIs needed for dealing with lazily-loaded hierarchical data (possibly out of scope of initial release)
    -   Describe the UI representation of hierarchical data (there should be a design doc to reference)
-   Action Menu
    -   Define how the action menu gets associated with a particular column
    -   Define the table-level(column-level?) API(s) for applying an action menu to the table (slot, properties, etc...)

_Properties_

> Placeholder

Reviewer 3: Does "Placeholder" mean that we'll have a future HLD that covers this section? I wonder if it would be helpful to mark each of these future HLDs. e.g. with a 📄 or by adding a link to the corresponding issues once they are created.

In addition to the API section, I think there are some other sections missing from the [custom.component.md](https://github.com/ni/nimble/blob/main/specs/templates/custom-component.md) spec template which may (or may not) also merit their own docs:
- Visual Appearance
- States
- Security
- Tooling
(just did a quick scan, there may be others)

Even if the answer is "N/A" it's good to keep these in the spec to remind reviewers to think them through too.

Author: I've added back those sections. The idea is certainly as the other HLDs are defined two things should happen: links to those documents should be added to the Feature APIs section (replacing their current bullet point), and then other sections of this spec should be updated as necessary. This would typically be adding content to the Properties/Events sections, but could also be adding content to the 'Visual Appearance' or 'States' sections.

As the performance for a table is of critical importance, we should formulate a deliberate approach to verifying the performance meets our expectations. For now, I recommend a series of manual tests, but ultimately it would be good to automate this process which I think we should cover in a separate HLD.

### Dependencies

-   [TanStack Table](https://github.com/tanstack/table)
-   [TanStack Virtual](https://github.com/TanStack/virtual)

These dependencies are MIT licensed, and have no dependencies of their own, so security concerns should be at a minimum. When building a TS app that does not include the `nimble-table` the TanStack libraries are not included in the build output.

### Test Plan

Intend to test completely with unit tests and Chromatic visual tests.

We also should attempt to create unit tests to cover the TanStack capabilities we will be leveraging, ideally by submitting them to the TanStack repo. Note that TanStack has already implemented much of the needed tests, except that they are targeting a React environment. The work should largely be a porting effort.

### Documentation

Storybooks will be added to document/showcase the various features and APIs.

> ### Open Issues

Reviewer 3: Since we don't plan to resolve this in the initial submission, I'd vote to move it to the corresponding section of the doc and just mark it as an HLD that needs to be written (similar to what you did for all the API HLDs). I could see this going in the Accessibility section.

Author: Done.

# Nimble Table

## Overview

The `nimble-table` is a component that offers a way to render tabular data in a variety of ways in each column.

### Background

[Nimble issue #283](https://github.com/ni/nimble/issues/283)

[Nimble Table Tech Stack Document](./tech-stack.md)

[Nimble Table Research Document](https://lucid.app/lucidspark/31f2314d-dd8e-46fd-8fc1-6e9f66700bb3/edit?viewport_loc=-1060%2C-25492%2C20822%2C12325%2CloaYwcZLRray4&invitationId=inv_38839ad5-72b2-4975-ab7a-6d8be33c960c)

[Table visual design](https://xd.adobe.com/view/33ffad4a-eb2c-4241-b8c5-ebfff1faf6f6-66ac/screen/b9cee5e2-49a4-425a-9ed4-38b23ba2e313/)

### Non-goals

-   The `nimble-table` will not offer spreadsheet-like features such as infinite columns, or summary functions.

> -   We do not intend for the `nimble-table` to handle data sets of 50K or more on the client-side. Visualizing such sizes of data sets are meant to be enabled through various "data virtualiazation" means, such as the server only sending over subsets of the data at a time, appropriately filtered down to a reasonable size.

Reviewer 3: nit: in the performance section we use 10K as the upper limit so may as well be consistent.
```suggestion
-   We do not intend for the `nimble-table` to handle data sets of 10K or more on the client-side. Visualizing such sizes of data sets are meant to be enabled through various "data virtualiazation" means, such as the server only sending over subsets of the data at a time, appropriately filtered down to a reasonable size.
```

-   Non-virtualized static tables.

### Features

In addition to simply rendering data, the `nimble-table` will provide APIs/interactions that will allow a user to do the following:

-   Interactively and programmatically size columns
-   Interactively and programmatically sort columns

> -   Pin columns: columns remain fixed during horizontal scrolling

Reviewer 2: Also need the ability to programmatically add/remove columns to support SLE workflows

Author: That workflow doesn't necessitate the need to add/remove columns via a programmatic API (i.e. something available only in a TS context). Instead, the running expectation is that template code will be constructed to populate the `nimble-table` component with columns based on the state determined by the workflows you refer to.

Reviewer 2: So, it will be possible to add/remove tables but it is up to client (SLE dev in this case) to build the UI and logic, right? Similar to how we will handle grouping by multiple columns?

Reviewer 3: I think this concern might be a bigger deal than we've realized. I don't think most SLE apps are going to know the names and types of the possible columns at dev-time. In the existing Configure Grid slide-in that lets the user pick which columns are visible, the list of columns is populated based on an API call and can contain columns that the user has defined. For user-defined columns, there is no information about the type of data and we currently dynamically inspect it to determine whether it should be rendered as a string/number/hyperlink/icon/etc.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10500124/205711489-40eb6651-9fd9-4c38-9be1-d9acb0cd7098.png)

Reviewer: @jattasNI, feel free to double check, but I'm not aware of any cases where NI-provided columns are not known at app-development time. I'm pretty sure the only thing that is dynamically determined is the set of custom properties a user has added.

Reviewer 3: I poked around at a few grids and confirmed this was the case. In some cases there are a lot of NI-provided columns, not all of which are visible in certain views, but I couldn't find cases where the columns came back from an API call (other than custom properties).

Author: I'll call this resolved for now.

-   Provide column ordering (programmatically only at first possibly)
-   Group rows: display rows in a collapsible section when they share the same value for the grouped column
-   Multi-select rows (interactively only at first possibly)
-   Provide hierarchy via the data
-   Provide custom column rendering
-   Provide API for adding action menu
-   Allow expected accessibility keyboard interactions for navigating (tbd)

> #### _Out of Scope of Initial Release_

Reviewer 4: To avoid the specs are talking about releases. Maybe this could be something like: "Additional features out of the scope of this spec"

"The following are features are out of the scope of the initial table spec and require additional research or HLDs for future implementation:"

Author: Updated.

The following are features that we intend to prioritize eventually after the initial release:

-   Hierarchy and Grouping together (though this could happen in the initial release if simple enough to accomplish)
-   Custom expanded row content
    -   An example would be showing a sub-table when you expand a row
-   Editable cells
-   APIs around pagination/infinite scrolling
-   High-level configuration APIs
    -   Allow for easy getting/setting of total configurable state, which is useful for maintaining state of the table as a user navigates to other pages in an app.
-   Filter on any text match across all cells
-   Selection configuration: Ability to specify single vs. multi-select vs. no-selection
-   Custom header templates: Provide clients the means to change the content used in the header (analogous to [FAST `headerTemplate`](https://github.com/microsoft/fast/blob/802443ffb2b19a078f9b48f62e6d1a35e3276fb5/packages/web-components/fast-foundation/src/data-grid/data-grid.ts#L55), and [TanStack `header.getContext()`](https://tanstack.com/table/v8/docs/api/core/header#getcontext)).

> -   Cell selection: Allow user to select a particular cell
>     -   Copying cell values is accomplished by highlighting the value in the cell (and pressing `Ctl-c`) as opposed to clicking on a cell (it showing itself as selected) and pressing `Ctl-c`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
-   Cell selection: Allow user to select a particular cell
    -   Copying cell values is accomplished by highlighting the value in the cell (and pressing `Ctl-c`) as opposed to using text selection gestures on the contents of a cell and pressing `Ctl-c`.
```

Author: Updated as discussed off-line.

-   Hierarchy
    -   Define how hierarchy will be represented in the data
        -   Attribute on table to represent parentId?
    -   Define event/property APIs needed for dealing with lazily-loaded hierarchical data (possibly out of scope of initial release)
    -   Describe the UI representation of hierarchical data (there should be a design doc to reference)
-   Action Menu
    -   Define how the action menu gets associated with a particular column
    -   Define the table-level(column-level?) API(s) for applying an action menu to the table (slot, properties, etc...)

_Properties_

Placeholder

_Events_

Placeholder

### Anatomy

_Slots_

-   `slottedColumns` (Placeholder for column slots)
-   `actionMenu` (Placeholder for action menu)

### Security

N/A

### Angular integration

Angular support should be accomplished through the typical directive patterns.

There could be room for there to be Angular-centric implementations such as using Angular components for things like the Action Menu, or possibly a custom column. This section should be updated as needed.

### Blazor integration

Blazor support should be accomplished through the typical integration patterns.

> One aspect of note is that the data API for the `nimble-table` component will not be attribute-based, which means that the Blazor component will not be able to provide a binding-based association of its own data to that of the web component. Instead, we will need to leverage JSInterop to send the data to the web component, which is async by nature.

Reviewer 4: mmm this might be too implementation detail-y or I might be misinterpreting. But I expect the user facing Blazor Component wrapper API is still going to be data binding based, any JS interop usage needed inside the blazor wrapper should be hidden from the user. Is that the expectation?

If anything we should make it our goal that JSInterop details are not exposed to users directly and it is an open question how that will be achieved until we investigate a bit more.

Author: So, my comment wasn't meant to imply that the JS Interop implementation would be exposed to the user in any way, but more of a signal to the developer of that, that that (sorry I had to grab hold of that opportunity to write 3 "that"s in a row) would be an implementation requirement (which isn't necessarily obvious).

My expectation is that the `Data` property is defined on the API surface like any other property would be (as a `Parameter`), but some implementation detail (be in the `setter` of that property, or some other override mechanism like `OnParameterSetAsync()` ) would handle the necessary JS Interop code. This means that there is no traditional binding of the `data` property on the web component in the Razor template (as we can't bind to properties...only attributes).

Reviewer 4: Gotcha, makes sense 👍 Could phrase it in spec as "One aspect is that the Data property is not attribute based so the Binding from the blazor component wrapper Data property to the web component will require additional JSInterop considerations to preserve the expected API style" or something.

Author: Updated (to a variant of what you wrote).

_Placeholder for other implementation details_

### States

Placeholder

### Accessibility

The `nimble-table` should align either to the W3C [grid interaction model](https://w3c.github.io/aria-practices/#grid) or the [table interaction model](https://w3c.github.io/aria-practices/#table) (TBD).

### Globalization

The order of table columns is inverted in RTL layouts.

_**Note**:_ This is flagged as "out of scope" for the initial release.

### Performance

We intend for the `nimble-table` to handle both the rendering and interactive operations, such as sorting, in a near-instantaneous fashion on datasets of at least 10K rows. Between 10K and 100K rows of data on the client-side, however, we expect to see a notable drop in performance.

> Clients, at least initially, will be expected to create mechanisms to restrict the amount of data coming to the client-side.

Reviewer 4: "at least initially"? I don't understand the implication here. The tanstack-based nimble table has no direct plan for  >> 50K elements right? That would require a biggere architecture change (async compute in workers, etc).

Author: Re-worded this block to "clients will be expected to limit the amount of data being sent to the table to ideally a maximum of 10K rows".
